>> Hi, it's James here
from "Food Matters."
And welcome to this special
program on seven steps
to freeing yourself from
anxiety, depression, and ADHD.
My guest today, Jodi Chapman,
is a health scientist
and naturopath.
And through her clinic, the
Center for Advanced Wellness,
she uses investigative
technologies
applied with a
naturopathic approach
and has helped thousands of
people recover their health.
It was through a
personal experience
that drove Jodi to become
an expert in this field.
Jodi, welcome and
tell us a little bit
about your experience.
>> Thank you.
I started off at
the age of seven
with my first recorded migraine.
And these happened to me
probably more than half
of the week, so almost daily.
But by the time I was 14,
they were happening daily.
So this was extreme
enough to require
medication or painkillers
every four hours.
And it was caused by many
different reasons at the time.
But I wasn't aware of that.
So from a daily response
to those headaches
I was on painkillers
every four hours,
I was on caffeine tablets every
four hours to keep me awake.
And I was on a cocktail of
medication from the doctors
that we're trying to work
out what the cause was
and/or how to treat it or how
to suppress those headaches.
Though, I didn't
have any success.
So I went through all of my teen
years, or from the age of 7,
and it amplified from the age of
14 around that hormonal shift.
And by the time I
was 23, that was
when I first was
able to get ahold
of what was happening there.
But those things were happening
underlying in the background
and I was getting through life.
And I was very
concerned for my future
because I had been on such
high levels of medication
all the time.
And there wasn't much I could
do to try and control that,
but I'll take the medication.
So I had concerns about having
children later on in life.
How was I going to do that if
I was on such strong medication
all the time?
Getting through pregnancies,
all of that kind of thing.
And by the time I was 20,
unfortunately, I lost my mom.
She passed away, and within
a week of that happening
I was covered in psoriasis
from head to toe.
And within another three
weeks of that I was hospital
hospitalized with ulcerative
colitis bowel disease.
So that then went on
another three years.
So in and out of hospital,
a lot of surgeries, no real
answers still.
And it wasn't until
I was, as I said,
when I was 23, when I started
to look into my health myself,
not getting any
answers, and having
to find out what it is for me
that was doing all of that.
>> Was that what inspired you
to study to become a naturopath?
>> Absolutely.
At the age of 23 was when I
came across a practitioner who
actually wasn't a
qualified practitioner.
He was a massage therapist,
and he had a belief
if you cleared out the tubes
and the piping in your body,
you could break out the
disease or break it up,
break up the blockages
and clear it all out.
And so he did this deep tissue
massage on me, on my gut
and on my head.
And within a few weeks he had me
clear of a lot of my symptoms.
And at the same time, he
gave me a few books to read.
And I'd been raised in
an orthodox medicine
type of household.
So we never saw naturopaths.
We never looked at
alternative health,
it was doctor all the way.
And anyway, he gave me a few
books on diet and health.
And I started to read them and
I started to implement them,
and I noticed huge changes.
And that was only
the basic stuff.
So I thought, right, I'm going
to find out more about this.
And I walked straight
down to university
and signed myself up.
>> Wow, fantastic.
So after you studied, then
you went into practice,
and, obviously, you've been in
practice for a number of years
now.
And like I said, you've
treated thousands of people
with anxiety and
depression or helped them
recover from their symptoms.
What are some of the symptoms
of depression and anxiety
and ADHD, and how
would people identify
that they have these symptoms?
>> Some people don't realize
that they have depression
or anxiety.
They see it from a
symptom point of view.
Some of the time
it's very mild, where
someone might be
just very overwhelmed
and they're feeling
very stressed.
They're irritated, they're
becoming intolerant
of the people around them
and they're really not
feeling very happy.
Sometimes it brings on
insomnia, or insomnia
can start the process where
stress and worry will cause
them to not sleep very well.
Fatigue will be another symptom.
But when people get
too far into that,
then sadness becomes an
issue or nervousness.
And this nervousness
and sadness can
start to become a daily problem
for them, where they can't seem
to pull themselves out of it.
They still might not
consider themselves
as someone who suffers
with depression or anxiety,
but they're getting those
symptoms around their lifestyle
and not really realizing that
it can develop into something
much more sinister.
>> OK.
And when we hear about
depression and anxiety,
we hear about things like
serotonin or dopamine.
What happens when people are
low in those particular brain
chemicals and neurotransmitters?
>> Serotonin is quite easy to
distinguish because you get
negative self-talk
or negativity.
It makes you criticize yourself,
criticize other people.
So if you consider a small
child at school, the shy child,
they're shy because they're
thinking no one likes me,
I don't fit in.
They've got this negative
self-talk happening.
And what that does is it
means that they don't feel
like they fit into society.
And this almost evolves their
personality as time goes on.
But they're most often
suffering with low serotonin.
So criticism of themselves and
of others later on in life.
So if they throw tantrums,
they get more angry,
they suffer with anxiety.
And that anxiety makes
them feel quite fearful.
And a fear response always comes
out as aggression or anger.
So you see little children
throwing tantrums and quite
upset, and it's
because they're afraid.
So with adults you
get negativity,
you get sadness, depression, but
you can get anxiety, as well.
So the heights of
anxiety but the lows
of sadness and depression.
>> And is that similar
with dopamine, as well,
when those levels
are suppressed?
>> Dopamine can
be very different.
Dopamine deficiency,
people can feel quite happy
and not even realize that
they've got this problem.
Because dopamine doesn't
cause any negative thoughts,
dopamine deficiency makes
you feel almost nothing.
So that feeling of losing
all touch with emotion.
So they sit on the lounge,
they don't want to do anything.
They don't want to go
anywhere, they lose motivation.
They think, I just don't
have any drive anymore.
I don't feel like going to work.
I used to like gardening
but now I don't care.
I used to want to go to the
gym but now I don't care.
I just want to watch
TV and just enjoy
sitting here doing nothing.
A lack of everything.
And that can cause
physical fatigue, as well.
So not only the mental
fatigue, but it goes on
to cause the physical fatigue.
So difficulty getting
up and doing the things
that they used to love doing,
even if they get the idea,
I know I have to do
it, they physically
can't get up and do it.
>> So when a patient is
diagnosed with depression
or anxiety from their medical
doctor or from their GP
and they come and see you, do
they always have the illness,
or what's happening there?
Are we overdiagnosing these
conditions these days?
>> Sometimes we find
that patients are given
the medication for symptoms
that are symptoms of depression
or anxiety, such as
fatigue or such as sadness.
When there has been
something emotional happen
in the household, sometimes that
can build and build and build
and can present as
depression to a GP,
where it may actually be
caused by another problem,
such as excessive stress
becoming adrenal fatigue.
That kind of thing can
cause all the same symptoms.
So they're treated
with antidepressants,
though that might not
be the answer for them.
>> Sure.
And how is somebody
typically diagnosed
with depression or anxiety
from a medical practitioner?
Not from yourself, but from the
mainstream medical community.
>> As far as I'm aware,
it's purely symptom-based.
>> OK.
So it's like a
subjective checklist.
Do you feel like this,
do you feel like that?
And then it's diagnosed.
And when you have patients
come to you on antidepressants
or on anxiety
medication, are they
able to get off their
medication or treat
these diseases naturally?
How do you normally
approach that?
>> What I find is that there
are a very small percentage
of people who do rely on that
medication in life-threatening
type situations, such as when
they're extremely suicidal.
Those people should
never consider coming off
their antidepressants
unless things have changed
dramatically for their health.
But there are 99% of my patients
never get to that extreme.
So they're being
medicated, yet it's never
going to be the point for
them as being suicidal.
So for those
patients, the goal is
to replenish their
system of everything
that they need to build them
back up to optimal levels
so that they're feeling so good
that then they can go and talk
to their doctor about
coming off their medication.
>> And we talk about
antidepressants and being put
on these, but when we understand
what causes depression,
there's so many different
theories out there.
It could be originating
from the gut,
it could be originating
from emotional trauma.
What do you believe to be
the root cause of depression
in the first place?
>> It can come from both ways.
The brain and the
gut is so intertwined
that they both use the same
brain chemicals to work.
So a lot of people don't
realize that serotonin
is used only 10% to 20% in
the brain for your mood.
The rest, the 80% to 90%, is
used to make your bowels move.
So some people
never get depression
but they'll have
lifelong constipation.
And it's the same problem.
So the same goes with dopamine.
It's manufactured in the gut.
So if you've got something
going on in the gut,
then your brain is where
it misses out first.
And you start to get mood
symptoms or mental health
symptoms.
Yet really, the process
is going on in the gut.
There are, however,
a lot of people
who do start with
the emotional trauma.
Something will
happen in their life,
whether it was from
childhood and they've
been through a lifelong
stressful environment,
such as abused children.
They are always needing to
produce so much more brain
chemical in their gut but
they don't necessarily
get the nutrients in the
diet to be able to do that.
So they will develop a lifestyle
of behavioral problems or mood
disorders because
they never knew
what it felt like to feel good.
Yet it's still that the
stress that they experience,
and the same goes
with anyone who
goes through a trauma or
a family death or divorce
or any of these types
of things, the stress
requires a whole lot
more nutrients to be
able to make those brain
chemicals so that they
can keep up with the emotions
and keep up with their moods.
Yet, if they don't get it from
their diet in higher levels
during that time, they
suffer with the symptoms
and the symptoms continue.
And it becomes a then
biochemical problem
where it started as
an emotional problem.
>> Interesting.
OK.
We talked about the
serotonin and the dopamine,
but are there any
brain chemicals
that are implemented
with mental health
or with anxiety or depression?
>> There aren't actually that
many brain chemicals that they
haven't--
They don't talk
about a lot of them,
but a couple of other
ones that I find
very important in looking at.
One called acetylcholine,
which is actually
in control of balancing your
fight and flight response.
So when you don't have
enough of that brain chemical
you can fall into
that stress response
where you're always on the
go, you're always panicking,
you're always nervous.
For those people, that
brain chemical actually
controls your digestion.
So when you irritate
your gut, it
becomes deficient because it's
trying to digest those foods.
It's trying to keep you in that
calm state of rest and digest.
And when you use up all
of that brain chemical
you fall into the fight
or flight response,
and you get stuck in there.
So you're always on the
go, you're always stressed,
you're burning up
your hormones, you're
getting high cortisol
level, and you're
in that rush, rush, rush phase.
And that can cause
anxiety that then
becomes an ongoing problem.
We've got GABA,
as well, which is
another one that can be a
problem specifically for kids
in ADHD.
So GABA's job is to calm
down too much excitation.
So if you don't
have enough GABA,
your moods can just
keep escalating.
So for some people, they get
anxiety, stress, everything
goes up.
But for kids, some of them
go into hypervigilance
and distractability
because they've
got nothing to keep them calm.
So they're all over
the place, they're
looking all over the place, and
their thinking is everywhere.
And they get the
diagnosis of ADHD
when it could be a
nutritional deficiency causing
that inability to produce that
particular brain chemical.
>> And it's funny how you see
so many patients coming in that
have been diagnosed with ADHD
or depression or anxiety,
and you might be
looking at them going,
hang on, we've got a gut issue
here or we've got a nutrient
uptake issue here.
And yet they're being put on
these dangerous medications
a lot of the time.
And that's a big challenge.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
Though, when you break it
down to where it comes from
and you start
treating those things,
the challenge falls
away very quickly
because you start to see
really quick changes.
And when someone's
deficient in something,
it doesn't take very long
to be able to produce
that pathway for them.
And it's a little bit
just like building.
All you need is the material.
So you supply the material,
and within days and weeks
you just see them change.
And it's not required anymore,
if they're on the medication,
you see them then
move into a site
where they can happily
talk to their doctor
and remove the medication.
And they start to behave as
normal people in society.